Here is a quick walkthrough of the steps you should take to ensure the 
LGR instrument is ready to go!

Note: If you have issues or questions at any time while you are setting up
the instrument, or if you notice it is starting to run weird, please read 
the manual! There is one for the autosampler and one for the LGR itself. Both
are located in the cabinet above the instrument (the right-most). 

What you will need to bring:
1. Your samples
2. A spray bottle of isopropyl alcohol
3. A pair of scisors
4. An open vial filled with distilled water

Steps:
1.Always, always parafilm your samples.

This one is a make or break. If done improperly you risk your run stopping
prematurely and the syringe becoming damaged. Grab some parafilm and an
autosampler tray from the instrument and cut the parafilm into horizontal 
strips. Take one of those strips and wrap it around roughly middle of your 
sample in such a way that all of the layers are on top of eachother. 
Then test you sample in the autosampler tray. It should fit VERY snuggly, 
so much so that you can lift up the tray without the sample's angle shifting 
almost at all. If it still seems a little lose, add some more! After you
have parafilmed your samples DO NOT put them in the fridge. It appears that
the cold tends to make the samples fit less tightly. 

We have had many cases where improper sample parafilming has stopped runs in
their place. In most cases, when the needle is withdrawn from the sample, it 
inadvertently carries the vial along with it, resulting in the vial being 
forcefully rammed multiple times onto the LGR inlet. We have walked into the 
water facility lab and found our sample vials scattered all across the 
workstation as they were thrown about by the autosampler. 


2.Make sure your syringe is clean and the piston moves smoothly 
(do not press "clean syringe" on the autosampler user interface)

This one is also very important. Go over to the autosampler display screen and press 
"Change Syringe". This will cause the arm of the autosampler to move and get into 
a position that allows the syringe to be removed. Slide up the plexiglass screen and 
loosen the top red nut above the syringe. Then, gently remove the syringe by carefully 
tilting it out and pulling up. Be aware of the position of the piston and syringe body, 
as you will need to recreate the setup when you are putting the syringe back
(basically, the piston is resting on a higher ledge than the syringe body). Also be 
cautious not to bend the needle too much as you are removing the syringe.

Now that the syringe is out, carefully move the piston exactly straight up and down
without completely removing the piston (the piston is a black cylinder that moves up
and down along a thin wire, removing the piston all the way out from the shaft of the 
syringe risks bending the very thin wire; once the wire is bent, it is a ticking time 
bomb before the syringe breaks due to increased wear and tear). While moving
the piston up and down you should feel a little bit of resistance and maybe feel or 
hear "grittiness" as you actuate the syringe. This is normal, as far as I am 
aware and is probably the result of slight corrosion. Holding the syringe vertically
(with the needle down) make a small pool of isopropanol over the hole on the top of the
syringe shaft. Cohesion should prevent the IPA from going into the hole, carefully 
actuate the piston between 0 and 0.8uL many times. You will notice that the shaft of the
syringe will begin to fill with liquid and you may notice an opaque liquid begining to come
out the bottom of the syringe and the liquid in the syringe shaft will star to become more 
cloudy as well. You will probably notice the syringe starting to have less friction as well. 
This is good, the syringe is not ready to use yet. If you were to let the IPA dry at this point
you would notice the syringe start to have more friction again, and any water you pipette will be 
very dirty. After you have acutated the syringe for a few minutes with the IPA in the shaft, flip 
the syringe so the needle is facing upwards at a slight angle and carefully pull the piston almost
all of the way out, then take a kimtech wipe and twist it so that you have a tight point and touch
tip to the liquid in the shaft. The liquid will remove . Pfrom the shaft into the kimtech wipe (it should
make the tip of the kimtech wipe a slight grey-black color). Now, reapply more fresh IPA to the shaft 
and continue to actuate the piston. Rinse and repeat this process of filling with IPA, actuating, 
removing gross grey IPA with the kimtech wipe until you are sure the pipette is clean. After each cycle, 
pull up about 1uL of distilled water into the syringe, then hold the syringe vertically with the needle 
down and expel the water so a drop is hanging from the tip. Note the color of the liquid. If it has any 
opaqueness, it is not clean yet.  

Once the syringe is clean it should actuate very smoothly and any expelled water should be crystal clear.

As a final effort to make sure the syringe is clean, put the needle of the syringe in the vial of 
distilled water and actuate up and down many times. At this point the syringe should be ready to go. 


3. Putting back the syringe:
There is a bent needle on the bottem shelf of the top right cabinent over the LGR, grab it. 

Back at the autosampler open up the plexiglass and carefully thread the needle through the syringe seat foot
(thing with the hole in it that touches the top of the samples). This may be difficult to do without bending
the needle. It is crucial that you do not bend it, so I have found that putting slight pressure on the back
side of the needle with the bent needle from the cabinent helps the syringe needle thread through the syringe
seat foot. Keeping the syringe as verticle as possible put the t-shaped part of the syringe in the appropriate
spot with the piston pulled up to about the 0.6 uL spot. As you are directing the syringe into position the 
piston head should fit into the chamber with the red nut. Tighten the nut, close the plexiglass and tell the 
autosampler the syringe has been replaced. At this point the arm of the autosampler should move back to its
null position. 

4. Replacing the septum

There is a red septum that the needle passes through during sample collection. This red septum is good for up to
~800 injections. Since the LGR will do 8 injections per sample, and there are usually around 100 samples, we just
switch out the septum every time we run the instrument. Replacement septa can be found in the same cabinent we
have been referencing for this whole walkthrough. 

Go over to the LGR instrument and click on "Setup", and then click on "change septum" and then "start". 
The LGR will then begin to depressurize. Once that process is completed, go over to the needle inlet and twist off
the metal cap (Warning: This thing is hot, so be prepared. You may use a paper-towel if you want. I would at least
use gloves. Be careful as you are removing the metal cap to not disturb the black conical piece directly underneith. 
It is sometimes attached to the septum and so is often removed when the metal cap is taken off. If the black piece
comes out, make sure it is very clean before putting it back (spaying with IPA and waiting until it is dry is probably
sufficient). Take the bent needle from before and use it to remove the red septum from the inside of the black cap. 
Remove any pieces of the septa that may have come off inside of the cap. Place a new septum into the cap with the hole 
facing up (towards where the needle will enter). Make sure it is fitted levely into the cap, and then replace the cap. 
Tighten the cap until it is snug and then a little bit furthur. Then tell the instrument that the septum is replaced. 

Once the instrument is pumped down you are almost done! 

4. Put your sample trays into the correct positions on the autosampler, make sure the worklist is ready and hit start. 
(We are not actually starting yet, we are going to watch the first couple samples and make sure everything is acting 
properly). 

5. Evaluating the quality of the spectrum
After the first couple of injections and measurements click spectrum. If everything is working properly there should 
be three peaks in the spectrum and not really anything else (one per cell). The middle peak should also be exactly in 
the middle of the middle cell (if so, it means that the lazer is properly adjusted). 

- If the spectrum is not aligned properly, it is an easy fix. Notice if the spectrum is too far to the right or too far 
to the left. Click on "Setup" and then "Spectrum alignment". If the spectrum was too far to the left, click the left 
arrow one or two times, do the same for the right if the spectrum is too far to the right. Exit setup and start the run again. 
After a few samples check the alignment of the sample again and make more adjustments as neccesary. Usually the spectrum is 
pretty well aligned so this should not be that time consuming. 

-If the spectrum is dirty (i.e. if the spectrum has more than 3 peaks; usually there are three main ones and many many small
ones), the only good solution I have come up with is simily letting the LGR run for an hour or two and then coming back and
restarting the collection again. It is ok if the samples are repeatedly drawn from because the silicon lids make a pretty good 
seal and we have never had any issues with them. Usually after an hour or so the contaminants have flushed themselves out
and the spectrums gets cleaned up. 

6. Making sure enough water is entering the LGR lazer-cell and that it is running well in general
As you have been testing the LGR thus far, you may have noticed the "Flag" column in the LGR data. This column is describing the
"states"  of the different water samples. YOu may notice oiso, hiso, dens, pres or norm come up. If you see lots of norm, that 
probably means that everything is fine, but a lot of the other flags usually indicates something is up. I have noticed that 
contamination causes the osio flag to occur a lot, and sometimes the hiso tag as well. Hiso means there is large amount of variability
in the H/D isotope ratio, which is what we are testing! So make sure that there are not too many hiso tags. dens and pres are related 
to the amount of water that is acutally able to reach the detector cell. With the amount of water we are injecting expect between 3E6
6E6 water molecules per injection (you can veiw this number in the data as well). It is also normal for the start of an LGR run to have 
a low amount of water molecules, which then becomes higher and higher until they stabilize around 4E6 or 5E6. This is part of the reason 
why I like to do one or two "prep" runs before the real thing. If the number of water molecules remains low this could mean that there is
an issue with your syringe. If this is paired with dense or pres flags, this is oftentimes an issue with the tightness of the metal cap, or
that the septum is angled and squished, as opposed to being flush with the needle port. Again, it is super normal to have many flags in the 
begining of a run as the LGR cavity replaces its native air with water vapor, so give it a little bit of time (at least an hour) before you start
reading the manual for potential solutions.

7. Finally begin:
After you have completed all of the checks here and properly setup your worklist, you should be good to finall start the run. Make sure to check in 
with you run regularly. Even after all of the safeguards, sometimes things just happen and it's better to catch the problems early on. Sometimes it is
hard to predict how long your run will last, but I have found that around 100 samples takes about a day or so. Good luck!
(make sure to see \Price_lab_CRDS_workflow_programs\LGR_guidefile generator\SETTING_UP_LGR_READ_ME.txt)


